

Chickarmane2008 - Stem cell lineage - NANOG GATA-6 switch

In this work, a dynamical model of lineage determination based upon a minimal
circuit, as discussed in PMID:
[17215298](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/18941526) , which contains the
Oct4/Sox2/Nanog core as well its interaction with a few other key genes is
discussed.

This model is described in the article:

[A computational model for understanding stem cell, trophectoderm and endoderm
lineage determination.](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/18941526)

Chickarmane V, Peterson C

PloS one. 2008, 3(10):e3478

Abstract:

BACKGROUND: Recent studies have associated the transcription factors, Oct4,
Sox2 and Nanog as parts of a self-regulating network which is responsible for
maintaining embryonic stem cell properties: self renewal and pluripotency. In
addition, mutual antagonism between two of these and other master regulators
have been shown to regulate lineage determination. In particular, an excess of
Cdx2 over Oct4 determines the trophectoderm lineage whereas an excess of
Gata-6 over Nanog determines differentiation into the endoderm lineage. Also,
under/over-expression studies of the master regulator Oct4 have revealed that
some self-renewal/pluripotency as well as differentiation genes are expressed
in a biphasic manner with respect to the concentration of Oct4. METHODOLOGY/

PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We construct a dynamical model of a minimalistic network,
extracted from ChIP-on-chip and microarray data as well as literature studies.
The model is based upon differential equations and makes two plausible
assumptions; activation of Gata-6 by Oct4 and repression of Nanog by an
Oct4-Gata-6 heterodimer. With these assumptions, the results of simulations
successfully describe the biphasic behavior as well as lineage commitment. The
model also predicts that reprogramming the network from a differentiated
state, in particular the endoderm state, into a stem cell state, is best
achieved by over-expressing Nanog, rather than by suppression of
differentiation genes such as Gata-6.

CONCLUSIONS: The computational model provides a mechanistic understanding of
how different lineages arise from the dynamics of the underlying regulatory
network. It provides a framework to explore strategies of reprogramming a cell
from a differentiated state to a stem cell state through directed
perturbations. Such an approach is highly relevant to regenerative medicine
since it allows for a rapid search over the host of possibilities for
reprogramming to a stem cell state.

This model is hosted on [BioModels Database](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/)
and identified by:
[MODEL8389825246](http://identifiers.org/biomodels.db/MODEL8389825246) .

To cite BioModels Database, please use: [BioModels Database: An enhanced,
curated and annotated resource for published quantitative kinetic
models](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/20587024) .

To the extent possible under law, all copyright and related or neighbouring
rights to this encoded model have been dedicated to the public domain
worldwide. Please refer to [CC0 Public Domain
Dedication](http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) for more
information.

